[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are some exciting
innovations developing
in the field of emotional
intelligence that take us
directly into the untapped
brilliance of the human mind.
My guest today
shares with us how
to bring love and lasting
prosperity to our families,
our businesses, and
our planet as a whole.
He is a consultant,
the executive coach
and president of the Institute
for Personal and Professional
Development.
He speaks and conducts
workshops internationally
on emotional
intelligence and health
in personal and
professional relationships.
It gives me great pleasure
to welcome Dr. Bill DeFoore.
Thank you for being with us.
>> Thank you, Carolyn.
>> You know, emotional
intelligence,
there's been a lot written
about it and it's--
the word is floated around.
Some of us know a
little bit about it.
And a whole lot of us know
not a whole lot about it.
So why don't we
begin with an idea
of what emotional
intelligence is all about?
>> Well, one of the things
that I find fascinating about
emotional intelligence is that
it really combines two worlds,
in a sense.
If we say someone is emotional,
that's not a compliment
ordinarily.
>> Right, yeah.
>> And if we say someone
is intelligent, it is.
So what we've done here
is brought two aspects
of our humanness together
that have been, in a way,
like shadow and light.
The emotion, the emotional part
of us has stayed in the shadow.
Because somehow we're not
supposed to be emotional.
And yet we are.
And the idea of
emotional intelligence
means being intelligent
about our emotions,
knowing and understanding
them, and intelligent in how
we use them in our everyday
lives and in our businesses.
>> There's something there,
beginning to see how we learn
differently.
And emotional intelligence
has something to do with that,
doesn't it?
>> Yes.
One thing is that
fear and anger reduce
the capacity of the higher
brain, the neocortex,
and inhibit learning.
And if we're having fun and we
feel connected to other people
and feel safe and cared
for, we learn more rapidly
and retain the
information longer.
>> So a child, or even
a student in college,
or someone that's
gone back to college,
anything that we're
trying to learn,
if we can in some way make it
appeal to our, where we are
emotionally, it will help?
>> Absolutely.
Absolutely.
And recognizing the place
and the value of each emotion
is essential.
Fear and anger have their place.
And yet, they inhibit learning.
>> So if I am trying to learn
something and I'm fearful
of that I'm not going to be able
to learn it or there's anything
in my personal life that's
going on, or if the instructor
somehow promotes
a sense of fear,
then I'm not going to
be able to integrate it.
>> Correct.
And if you work
for an organization
in which intimidation and fear
based management is the norm,
then there will be a
pervading sense of fear,
usually subconscious, throughout
the organization, which
inhibits creative thinking
and learning and growth
within the organization.
>> What have you found from
people who have deepened
their understanding of
emotional intelligence?
What have they
gained in their life?
learned about themself
and how has it
changed their life?
>> I think probably one of
the most profound impacts
of increased emotional
intelligence, Carolyn,
is intuition and a greater
sense of trust in one's own
intuition.
Intuition is the head and
the heart working together
to create a brilliant,
innovative idea about how
to handle this
personal situation,
or how to respond to
this business challenge.
Every great business
leader understands
the value of intuition.
We simply don't have enough
time to gather all of the facts.
And in some cases, the facts
are simply not available.
And so it is intuition
that gives us the ability
to move quickly and effectively
in situations which are perhaps
poorly defined.
>> So how is our intuition
and our emotional intelligence
joined together?
What is-- deepen my
understanding in that area.
>> Well, intelligence
is about the intellect,
which is about the functioning
of certain components
of the brain.
And emotion has
more to do with what
we call the heart, the
metaphorical heart.
And that has to do
with the right brain
and the emotional
brain, which is
the mammalian and reptilian
aspects of the brain.
But you know, an interesting
kind of side comment
here is that the actual
physical organ of the heart--
this is discovered by
HeartMath institute--
the physical organ
of the human heart
works better when we express
love and appreciation
and functions more poorly when
we are cynical and expressing
doubt and fear.
So that's an interesting thing.
The physical heart
wants us, likes it
when we are expressing
love and appreciation.
>> And feeling loved
and appreciated also.
Again, I'm thinking
that that's when we'd
be more receptive to learning.
Are there different levels
of emotional intelligence
with different people?
>> Absolutely.
There is an EQ map
that has been developed
by an organization
in San Francisco that
is a very user friendly
self-evaluation kind of way
of measuring emotional
intelligence that
points specifically and directly
to what we can do to raise it.
And so there are clearly
delineated processes
for measuring and for increasing
emotional intelligence that
can be applied in the personal
and professional dimensions.
>> So we want to increase
our emotional intelligence.
>> Absolutely.
>> And what happens, what
are some of the, I guess,
the benefits that we derive
from having more awareness
and increased intelligence
about our emotions?
>> One great benefit is an
improved ability to communicate
clearly and directly, and fewer
obstacles and barriers between
us and significant
people in our lives.
Whether those are business
associates or loved ones,
family members, dear friends.
So barriers are removed
as clarity and precision
in communication is increased.
That's one area.
Another area has to do with
adaptability and flexibility,
being able to move
quickly and effectively
through stressful situations.
Because it is anger and fear
and related feelings of feeling
paralyzed or stressed
out or overwhelmed that
slow us down or
even stop us cold
in those stressful situations.
The more at peace we
are and the more fluid
we are in how we are
managing our emotions,
the more effectively we can move
through stress and even crisis.
So crisis management
becomes much more easy
and flowing with
emotional intelligence.
>> Bill, give me an example.
Give us an example of
what managing our emotions
might look like, in either a
business or personal situation.
>> Well, it's first of
all an internal process.
It means I need to know myself.
And I need to know
how to respond when
I feel my emotions coming up.
If I am aware of some anger,
some fear, some sorrow that's
in me, knowing what
I can do about that,
not necessarily to eliminate
it, but to respond to it,
and perhaps to communicate
effectively from that emotion.
Because what we're
finding in business,
for example, is that if
you and I are in a business
relationship and I'm feeling
a particularly large amount
of sorrow today--
I may know some of the
reasons, I may not know them--
if I can talk to you briefly
about that before we begin
any of our business
processes, we
will do much better business.
I will be more fully
in the relationship
and we will be more effective
in our business processes.
>> So what would you say?
We're sitting down.
There's a board meeting
that's about to start.
And you're across
the table from me.
What would be--
what would you say?
>> I would say, I'd
like you to know--
and let's say that the
whole group is here.
I'd like all of you to know that
I'm feeling some sadness today,
and I've got some ideas
of why that's there.
There's some
problems in my family
that I may talk with you
individually about later.
And also, there's some of this
that I'm not quite sure about.
Perhaps I'll learn more
as the day goes on.
But I wanted you
to know that this
is what's going on with me.
And it's not about you
or our subject matter.
This is who I am today
and this is what I'm
bringing into this situation.
>> And I would suspect
as a result then,
it wouldn't come up.
It would be managed.
It wouldn't come up in
a different way, maybe
a fearful way or something, when
a subject matter is brought up
at the business meeting that has
nothing to do with your sorrow.
But somehow, your sorrow
would enter into that.
>> Right.
And to play this out
a little further,
let's say we have some
important business
decisions to make today.
And this is how I feel.
Fear and anger can immediately
be triggered by this feeling
that I'm having.
If I'm not aware of it
and in touch with it
and I haven't come
clear with the group
and really presented myself, who
I am and how I feel, then one,
my decision making will be
affected by my emotions.
I will be too fearful and
perhaps pass on a good business
opportunity, based
on a personal emotion
that I'm not in touch with.
>> It would be
blocked, in some way.
>> I would be blocked.
And you, and other
board members,
might misinterpret my
affect, the feeling
that I put into what I
say, as related to them
or related to the
business, when it really
has nothing to do with
what's going on at the table.
>> And you expect me, then,
to not have a long response,
but at least to
acknowledge where you are.
And then we can
kind of pave the way
to have a good business meeting.
When we come back-- we
need to take a moment
to hear from our supporters--
and when we come back,
let's talk a little
bit more about how
this also, the awareness
of emotional intelligence
affects our personal
life, as well.
You're watching
"World of Wisdom."
I'm Carolyn Craft.
And I'm speaking with
Dr. Bill DeFoore.
Stay tuned.
We'll be back in just a moment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And welcome back to
"A World of Wisdom."
I'm Carolyn Craft, and I'm
speaking with Dr. Bill DeFoore.
And we are talking about
emotional intelligence.
And specifically,
we were speaking
earlier about emotional
intelligence in the workplace.
Something you say, business
is always personal.
Explain how it's
always personal for us.
>> Well, in a kind of
a philosophical sense,
we could say that there aren't
any people on this planet who
are not engaged in
some kind of business.
And so to that extent,
everyone is a business person.
From the person on the
street corner with a tin can
and maybe a little
homemade instrument,
they're trying to get
people to contribute with,
to the person who's
literally buying and selling
money on Wall Street.
And on the full range,
that's all exchange
of goods and services.
And in another
sense, our economy,
our global economy
affects everyone.
So what happens in
the business world,
decisions made by
corporate leaders,
by government leaders
regarding economic values,
affects everyone.
It affects the quality
of goods and services
that are available to us.
It affects the availability
of those goods and services.
So our economy is
a living, breathing
aspect of our consciousness.
And we are all part of that.
So to that extent,
business is personal.
If something happens in Japan
with their economy, we feel it.
And we recently had a major
crisis in the Eastern economy
which had a great impact
on our stock prices.
>> It seems like that you talk
about the shadow side of what
we bring to business,
and business shadow side.
It seems like in addressing
the emotional intelligence,
we're perhaps putting light
on what is already personal
anyway and happening
there anyway?
>> Yes.
It's rather than running from
that downturn in our profits
or pretending that the conflicts
and the vendettas and the games
and the backstabbing
at work are not there,
we turn and look
directly at them.
And we look not at them to
fix them or change them,
but to find the value.
What is the learning
that we can gain
from examining exactly what's
going on in this perhaps
long-term vendetta,
which can be extremely
costly in the
business relationship.
Or in a family.
If two people in a family
are not getting along,
it affects everyone
else in the family
and it has a tremendous
emotional drain on everyone.
What can be gained by
looking specifically at that
and using some very clear and
practical tools for opening it
up to meaningful communication?
>> You do workshops
all over the world.
And you work with
businesses, in particular two
that are opening up to this.
They do need a facilitator
in the beginning,
I would think, to
understand this.
Then what do they do?
I mean, what happens--
again, going back to
that board meeting.
We all come in around
the table there.
And you've been there and shared
with us some ways to sit there
and actually share
what's going on with us.
And then you're gone.
What helps us make
that transition
and know that that's
a real good thing
to be doing with one another,
to really understand and manage
our emotional intelligence?
>> Organizations that
apply these principles
on a consistent basis
increase their level of trust.
And because their level
of trust is increased,
they're more honest and
more current and more open.
And then the empowerment of
individuals and work teams
automatically results.
And business leaders will
say, you take care of that.
Let me know how you're doing.
Ask my advice.
But it's your deal.
I trust you to
take care of that.
One organization,
a power company
that has plants
all over the world,
has someone who is a head of
maintenance doing fundraising,
for example.
And that's wonderful.
You know, when the rigid job
description doesn't confine
someone and people are empowered
to be innovative and creative
and use untapped resources,
it's wonderful and amazing what
can happen in an organization.
>> There is an automatic
care that's understood, too.
And I want to know what
is going on with you.
Not to be your therapist, but
to know that that part of you
that you bring that is
in sorrow or whatever
is an important part.
It seems that it would help
just overall communication.
And I think you talk
also about the retention
level with employees.
How does it help that?
>> If, or when, individuals feel
cared for in an organization,
they're more likely to stay.
The workplace surveys
that have been conducted
indicate that pay is
third or fourth down
in terms of priority.
Feeling connected and a
part of the organization
is one of the first.
Another one of the top ones is
feeling an alliance of vision
and purpose and
feeling that they
are making a contribution
that is meaningful to them
through their work.
>> And I'm hearing, too,
that we can learn this.
This is something
that can be learned.
It's not something that someone
has and someone doesn't.
>> It's how we're
designed, Carolyn.
We were designed to be
joyful, exuberant, creative,
magnificent beings.
And unexpressed fear, pain, and
anger block that brilliance.
So we don't talk
about fear and pain
and anger because
it's fun, simply
because it is
effective for untapping
the brilliance, the light
that is behind all of that.
>> You say there are
three areas, at least,
business and personal.
And there's also
a spiritual level
that is helped if
we can understand
our emotional intelligence.
>> You know, it's found that
people who have a spiritual
connection of some kind are
healthier physically and live
longer.
It's often also found
that business leaders who
have some kind of
spiritual focus
tend to be able to integrate
some elements of that
into their work.
So for many people, a spiritual
focus is extremely important.
One of the elements
of that is faith.
And faith and optimism
have been found
to consistently correlate
with health and resiliency
regarding illness.
So spirituality has some very
practical health-related value
and benefit.
The way it relates to emotional
intelligence is to the extent
that we are captivated
by and controlled
by our fear, or our
anger, or our vendetta,
or controlled and held
back by sorrow, or perhaps
related depression, our
spirituality is blocked.
Spirituality aligns
itself with the emotions
of joy, love, and exuberance.
And that is an
infinite wellspring
inside every one of us.
>> That's what keeps us
young, and getting younger.
What does an organization
look like that is managing
the emotional intelligence?
Themselves and other.
>> Yes.
The people love their work.
They're excited, energetic.
They're real.
They're talking with each
other about their lives.
They're fully present.
They didn't leave their
heart or their body
or their other personal
issues at the door.
They brought their whole
selves into the workplace.
>> So they're not cut off
from, this is my business life
and this is my personal life.
>> Not at all.
And brilliantly creative, trying
things no one else has tried
and succeeding, and
literally breaking records
with profitability and growth
and sustainable, grounded
growth.
Because often growth is like the
first indication of a decline.
>> If we know the
benefits of this,
then what keeps us from
exploring it and allowing
someone to be fully who they
are in the business environment
or in our personal environment?
>> Two things.
One is the presence
and the prevalence
of fear in human consciousness.
It's huge.
And it's fed by much of what is
in the media and much of what
is just in human consciousness
and in conversation.
The game of ain't
it awful and talking
about how bad things are
is a very popular game
that a lot of people
play a lot of the time.
>> It's like playing the
same CD over and over again.
>> Yes.
Unconsciously,
we're feeding fear.
That's one thing.
And the other is education.
We have not been educated,
in any formal sense,
about our emotions.
We've always had
them, but we've never
made a specific attempt to
become intelligent about them.
>> What do you recommend to--
in our final moments here--
to someone who wants to
explore more about this?
Other than we're going
to be having your books
on during the breaks.
But what else could they do?
>> Tell your story.
I would recommend to the viewers
that they tell their story
to people who matter to them.
Tell about the best and the
worst of times, the memories
that have never gone away.
And ask the people
that they love
for their stories, the best
and the worst of those stories.
>> Bill DeFoore, thank you so
much for being with us on "A
World of Wisdom" and in
opening our heart and sharing
your wisdom.
It's been a pleasure.
>> Thank you, Carolyn.
>> And thank you for joining us.
Stay tuned for more
from the Wisdom Network.